Add observability for ALTER TABLE ... COMPACT (#11684)
pingcap/docs: sql-statements/sql-statement-alter-table-compact.md

</CustomContent>

## Observe data compaction progress

You can observe the progress of data compaction or determine whether to initiate compaction for a table by checking the `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` column in the `INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES` table. The larger the value of `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS`, the more data that can be compacted. If `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` is `0`, all data in the table is in the best state and does not need to be compacted.

<details>

>   <summary>Example: Check the compaction state of a common table</summary>

Reviewer: How about calling it "non-partitioned tables"?

>   <summary>Example: Check the compaction state of a common table</summary>

Author: ```suggestion
  <summary>Example: Check the compaction state of a non-partitioned table</summary>
```

    WHERE IS_TOMBSTONE = 0 AND
    `TIDB_DATABASE` = "test" AND `TIDB_TABLE` = "foo";
+------------------+-------------------+
| TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS | TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS |
+------------------+-------------------+
|                0 |                 0 |
+------------------+-------------------+
INSERT INTO foo VALUES (1), (3), (7);
SELECT TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS, TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES
    WHERE IS_TOMBSTONE = 0 AND
    `TIDB_DATABASE` = "test" AND `TIDB_TABLE` = "foo";
+------------------+-------------------+
| TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS | TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS |
+------------------+-------------------+
|                3 |                 0 |
+------------------+-------------------+
-- Newly written data can be compacted
ALTER TABLE foo COMPACT TIFLASH REPLICA;
SELECT TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS, TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES
    WHERE IS_TOMBSTONE = 0 AND
    `TIDB_DATABASE` = "test" AND `TIDB_TABLE` = "foo";
+------------------+-------------------+
| TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS | TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS |
+------------------+-------------------+
|                0 |                 3 |
+------------------+-------------------+

> -- All data is in the best state and no compaction is required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- All data is in the best state and no compaction is needed
```

```

</details>

<details>

>   <summary>Example: Check the compaction state of partitioned tables</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <summary>Example: Check the compaction state of a partitioned table</summary>
```

```sql
USE test;
CREATE TABLE employees
    (id INT NOT NULL, store_id INT)
    PARTITION BY LIST (store_id) (
        PARTITION pNorth VALUES IN (1, 2, 3, 4, 5),
        PARTITION pEast VALUES IN (6, 7, 8, 9, 10),
        PARTITION pWest VALUES IN (11, 12, 13, 14, 15),
        PARTITION pCentral VALUES IN (16, 17, 18, 19, 20)
    );
ALTER TABLE employees SET TIFLASH REPLICA 1;
INSERT INTO employees VALUES (1, 1), (6, 6), (10, 10);
SELECT PARTITION_NAME, TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS, TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS
    FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES t, INFORMATION_SCHEMA.PARTITIONS p
    WHERE t.IS_TOMBSTONE = 0 AND t.TABLE_ID = p.TIDB_PARTITION_ID AND
    p.TABLE_SCHEMA = "test" AND p.TABLE_NAME = "employees";
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+
| PARTITION_NAME | TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS | TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS |
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+
| pNorth         |                1 |                 0 |
| pEast          |                2 |                 0 |
| pWest          |                0 |                 0 |
| pCentral       |                0 |                 0 |
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+

> -- Some partitioned tables can be compacted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- Some partitions can be compacted
```

ALTER TABLE employees COMPACT TIFLASH REPLICA;
SELECT PARTITION_NAME, TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS, TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS
    FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIFLASH_TABLES t, INFORMATION_SCHEMA.PARTITIONS p
    WHERE t.IS_TOMBSTONE = 0 AND t.TABLE_ID = p.TIDB_PARTITION_ID AND
    p.TABLE_SCHEMA = "test" AND p.TABLE_NAME = "employees";
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+
| PARTITION_NAME | TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS | TOTAL_STABLE_ROWS |
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+
| pNorth         |                0 |                 1 |
| pEast          |                0 |                 2 |
| pWest          |                0 |                 0 |
| pCentral       |                0 |                 0 |
+----------------+------------------+-------------------+

> -- Data in al partitions is in the best state and no compaction is required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- Data in all partitions is in the best state and no compaction is needed
```

Compaction is an optional action so that I think using "needed" would be better.

```

</details>

> **Note:**
>
> - If data is updated during compaction, `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` might still be a non-zero value after compaction is done. This is normal and indicates that these updates have not been compacted. To compact these updates, execute the `ALTER TABLE ... COMPACT` statement again.
>

> > - `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` indicates the number of data versions, not the number of rows. For example, if you insert a row and then delete it, `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` will increase by 2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` indicates the data version, not the number of rows. For example, if you insert a row and then delete it, `TOTAL_DELTA_ROWS` will increase by 2.
```
